Now, on this Windows computer, I'm going to change the DNS server to the Cisco router.
So go to the Ethernet settings.
Rather than using Google as the DNS server and CloudFlare, I'm only going to specify my local router
as the DNS server.
Now, in this example, I've configured the router to accept a DNS queries and answer them, and if
it doesn't know the answer to forward it to Google.
This is once again a Cisco it, but to your home router probably does something very, very similar.
So if I type show run pipe include, which basically allows me to look for a command and search for
DNS you can see that I've enabled IP DNS server so the router will act like a DNS server.
Show IP Route shows us that it has a default route to a router physically in my local network.
That's another Cisco router that actually physically connects me out onto the Internet.
This device can ping google.com.
So if I type show
run type include name.
Typically, I would have IP name server, something like this, but it actually got to that because
the outside interface, in other words, the interface connecting this device to the Internet is using
DHCP.
So through DHCP, it learnt the default gateway it also learnt the DNS server information.
So once again, it could ping DavidBombal.com as an example.
Now the PC won't be able to ping r1.home.com as an example because the router isn't
configured with that information. On the Cisco router
If I try and ping r1.home.com
that's not going to work because it doesn't know about that domain notice
it's actually trying to get to the Internet router to try and find out what that domain is
but if I type IP host and specify a hostname like r1.home.com and then specify an IP address
of, let's say, 10.1.1.254 the local router, this router will be able to ping itself.
It's done a name resolution locally and the PC will also be able to ping that domain.
I'm going to flush the DNS cache so it doesn't have any cached entries locally and then in gns3
I'll run a Wireshark capture here
and what will filter for is DNS.
So basically, we'll see a DNS request from the PC going to the router and the router replying if
it does a DNS request. So ping R1.home.com that works in Wireshark, we can see the DNS request
from another random or ephemeral port going to Port 53
but the DNS Service 10.1.1.254, which is the local router, it's asking for the IP address
of this domain name and the route replying back, saying the IP address of that domain name is 10.1
.1.254.
So standard query for an A record because this is IPv4
but in this case, the query went to the router.
Now the routers gonna forward on DNS queries that it doesn't know the answer to, and we can prove
that by running a Wireshark capture between the router and the internet
so on this link.
So we're seeing a whole bunch of traffic because that is bridged to my physical network.
But once again, what I'll do here is filter for DNS can see some other DNS queries already taking place.
On the Windows PC I'll ping davidbombal.com once again, you don't have to use ping you
could use nslookup, so let me show you that as well
but notice it did get resolved and it looks like it didn't get forwarded.
So let's do an nslookup for a different domain, let's say Cisco.com resolution is this IP
address.
So notice, there we go, we've done an nslookup notice in this case, it's a DNS query for both
the IPv4 address.
So we've got a query for the A record cisco.com
and then we've also got a query for the IPv6 IP address.
So in this case, the reply came back saying this is the IP address of cisco IPv4 and this
is the IPv6 address
and we can see that here, IPv6 and IPv4. In our Wireshark capture
notice that the source IP address is192.168.167, which is actually the router.
show IP interface brief shows us that that is the IP address of the router.
So the router is querying another device for the IP address information because it doesn't know it locally.
So that's the whole idea with DNS.
If the local DNS server doesn't know the answer, it forwards that query to a more authoritative DNS
server.
And in this case, we're getting both the IPv4 IP address as well as the IPv6 IP
address because I used nslookup.
Now you need to make sure that the DNS server that you queering is giving you good information.
As an example, on this router, I could create a hostname for cisco.com and simply pointed to another
IP address, let's say the local router. On the PC
I'll flush the DNS cache, so flush DNS and then I'll ping cisco.com.
Notice the IP address resolved is 10.1.1.254
it's not to the actual IP address of cisco.
So if your DNS entries are manipulated or you're  connecting to a false DNS server, you could end up going
to the incorrect server.
You may think you're going to cisco.com or another domain, but actually you're being redirected
somewhere else.
So hackers will often target DNS servers, have rogue DNS servers which allow them to push your traffic
where they want to.
Again, fortunately, because of Certificate's preloaded on browsers today, you may be warned if you
go to the wrong server.
Typically, you're not going to use your cisco.com as a DNS server you might use it to for DNS requests
onto a DNS serve on the Internet, but you wouldn't want to configure your local router as the DNS server.
You may in some cases, but typically not.
What you typically want to use is a Linux server to be the DNS server.
So in this example, I'm going to show you how to set up a DNS server on a ubuntu computer.
Now, this is a ubuntu desktop.
So IF config shows us the IP address of the server, can we ping google.com?
Yes, we can, so we're getting a resolution of that domain.
Now to set up this Ubuntu PC as a DNS server, I need to disable System D resolved because there's
a conflict on Port 53.
You cannot have two services listening on Port 53, I want to set up dnsmasq
So I want to disable this process so that dnsmasq can listen on that port
number.
So I'm going to disable system D resolved and then I'm going to stop it.
I'll put all these commands below this video if you want to access this yourself and see the commands.
Next thing I'm going to do is edit.
I'm just going to use nano for that to keep it simple resolve.conf
name service set to this at the moment. I'm going to set the name server to Google
and then I'm going to do sudo apt update to update references, it might be a bit slow here because
I'm going through the gns3 network, going through Cisco devices like this in gns3s very slow,
so I'll speed the video up if necessary.
OK, so the references have been updated, so what I'm going to do is install dnsmasq
And that's now being installed now my Mac is going crazy, there seems to be an issue with VMware Fusion
and a Mac where the CPU starts acting like mad.
So I'm sorry if there's a lot of background noise, but hopefully you can hear what I'm saying. Now to
edit dnsmasq
It's not that difficult.
I'm going to edit etc/dnsmasq.conf.
Now, quite a few options that you can change here, but I'm just going to change some of the basics.
Set the port to 53
that is the default.
For housekeeping and to be a better net citizen, I'm going to uncomment domain needed and bogus
priv. So we'll never forward plain domain names onto the Internet and non-routable address space.
And then essentially all I need to do
is uncomment this because I don't want to use etc resolve, I'm going to put domain names directly
here.
So what I could do is simply add domain names like r1.home.com and the IP address and whatever
other domain names I want to enter.
So let's say myrouter.home.com, same IP address and then all I need to do is save that file and
then restart the service.
So sudo systemctl restart dnsmasq.
I can look at the status if I want to.
Can see that this lightweight dhcp and caching DNS server is running, so now on my Windows PC, to prove the
point, lets configure the DNS server to the ubuntu PC.
So I'm going to set the DNS server here to 200, which is my Ubuntu PC and click, OK, so let's flush
the DNS.
DNS has been flushed do that again, so can I ping r1.home.com?
Yes, I can, because that's been resolved by the Ubuntu server.
Now, that was quite a long video, but hopefully you've learned something.
I've shown you how to capture DNS queries and responses using Wireshark.
I showed you the source and destination port numbers.
I showed you how you can configure a Cisco router as a DNS server and how to configure and a n ubuntu
PC as a DNS server
And then we tested the queries and made sure that it worked properly.
I'm David Bumble and I want to wish you all the very best.